David, go ahead and start the tapes. Okay, we're rolling. First of all, I just
wondered if you might tell us a little bit about how you, the origin of the
column in Locus that you write. Well, about two, two and a half years ago, I was
invited to address a group of authors, the American Society of Journalists and
Authors, And I chose to talk to them about certain contractual clauses that I
thought might be pitfalls for most professional authors. In the questioning that
followed, I found an appalling ignorance on the part of authors on the subject
of contracts. And many of these people are highly respected professional
journalists journalists and book authors. And yet it was clear to me that they
didn't know anything, or very much I should say, about how to read a contract,
how to negotiate one, and how to alter a clause to their own benefit. And so I
decided to write a column for the many other writers who probably are in the
same position. And I asked Charles Brown, the editor of Locus, a publisher of
Locus, I guess, whether he'd be interested in publishing it and it was quite
agreeable and thereafter a number of magazines newsletters published by other
writers groups such as Western Writers of America Romance Writers of America
Mystery Writers of America took on the column because they felt their authors
were in the same position so actually Locus then was your first magazine of that
type that you wrote the column for yes Locus was I still consider myself as
writing the column for Locus ok fine would you be would you be allowed to tell
me which science fiction authors or just some of them that you do represent well
no I don't mind at all I think it's fairly common knowledge in the science
fiction community we represent Harlan Ellison Gregory Benford, Greg Bear,
Elizabeth Lynn, Marta Randall, Barry Longyear, Warren Norwood, Jessica
Salmonson, and I'd say three or four more. Okay. If you had to sell a decent
manuscript by an unknown author, Would you prefer to work with a romance, a
western, a mystery, a science fiction, or what sort of genre of literature?
Well, my orientation has always been the paperback original market. Not that my
agency doesn't handle hardcovers. We handle quite a lot of them, dozens and
dozens hardcovers, and many have been on the bestseller list and book club
selections and so forth. But the blood of the industry is the paperback market,
and the paperback market does break down into some fairly convenient genres. And
agents, I guess, are a little bit like nomads in that they follow the source of
life. In this case, for instance, the hot market right now is contemporary
romances, And so we have a very active department in contemporary romances.
Science fiction has become somewhat soft since the Star Trek, Star Wars
phenomenon. and although it's still a very active market, we have noticed a kind
of sorting out of important writers from what they call the mid-list writers,
that is to say those writers who aren't quite of the blockbuster or best-seller
category and yet they're better than what some people might refer to as, you
know, as hack writers. They find themselves in a market where there really isn't
an audience anymore. So we have found that writers really have to choose between
going to something else or becoming stars in the science fiction market. There's
no middle ground anymore. And that's true of just about all the genres,
westerns. Romance may be the place that is most open for new writers,
inexperienced writers. But in the science fiction world, I think you must start
with some advantage or you're going to have a tough struggle ahead of you. I
think we've never spoken to an agent before and from your perspective I think
you can answer certain questions that I think anybody else would have difficulty
answering and one of them I wanted to ask you is from your perspective what
determines the popularity of a genre of literature in paperback is it the
publishers who create the taste or what causes sometimes the publishers create
the taste and sometimes the market the consumer creates the demand, and
sometimes it's the agent. For instance, I find myself very often in speaking to
publishers, I find myself in a double role. I keep my ears open and try to
listen to what a publisher tells me about what he's able to sell and what he's
not able to sell, and so I have a kind of passive role and that I pass along to
authors what the publishers tell me the market is doing. However, if I begin to
notice a trend, I then try to help create a market by turning to other
publishers and saying, listen, I've had lunch the last couple of months with
four publishers and they all tell me that hard science fiction is not as active
as fantasy and swords and sorcery and so maybe you'd be interested in some sort
of sorcery. So an agent is in the position of shaping the market once he begins
to detect the trend.
Okay, that was interesting. I guess after reading your columns, of course, I'm
coming to understand how much influence an agent can have. I don't think I
realized that before.
Okay, I think I know the answer to this. In fact, most of the questions I'm
asking you, I have some idea of what you'll say because of what I've read of
your work, but I still need to ask it. I know that you have different contracts
for different clients or different authors, but say a contract with any sort of
author, not just science fiction, is it dependent upon if an author is new or
established according to what kind of contract he gets? Well, I think authors
and agents probably ought to try to penetrate through a lot of the haze that
surrounds contractual negotiations and realize that the essential in a
contractual negotiation is who has the power. For the beginning author, the
first author, or the author of some work for minor markets, the power definitely
rests with the publisher. The publisher, the author, in effect, is saying to the
publisher, I will sign anything you hand me if you publish me. And the publisher
says, well, I'm glad to hear that, because if you don't like our terms, we'll
find somebody else to write for us. Now, obviously, the power in that equation
lies with the publisher. However, as an author begins to develop, he has a
following. His books begin to sell. The prices that he gets for his work begin
to escalate. He may have a bestseller. He now has other publishers interested in
publishing him. And now the equation is on the other foot, if I may make some
metaphor. And it's now the author who says, the publisher says, I will do
anything to keep you. And the author says, well, then you'd better meet my terms
because there are plenty of publishers out there who will publish me if you
don't like what I have, the terms that I'm ready to dictate. So when you get
down to where this raw power and the agent tries to put himself in those power
vectors, I guess you would say, and get some sense of where they converge. And
that's the point at which a contract materializes. A contract is a direct
reflection of the power flow between the two parties. And at the point where
they all interface, that is what a contract reads. That's excellent. Very good.
you talk just like you write I think I'm not sure that's good or bad listen
science fiction fans are I think more fanatic than other types and a lot of them
of course are interested in writing and doing something besides just reading it
if somebody had a reasonable amount of talent what would you advise an aspiring
science fiction author where should you begin always begin with the magazines
you're absolutely right about science fiction fans being more fanatic. But they
are also fortunate in having a place where they can begin in the shorter media
where most writers in other genres don't have the chance. I mean, there are very
few places where a romance writer can teethe. You know, you can't write romance
short stories unless you write for try to write for some of the slicker women's
magazines and they're of course very demanding in what they accept there used to
be western magazines many many of them but those almost all of them are gone now
mystery magazines there are still a couple of them but it's not like what it
used to be when I got into the business about 25 years ago so So one of the few
remaining genres that invites new talent and cultivates it is science fiction,
where you have very active magazine market and anthology market for original
stories. You also have conventions. Of course, Western writers, romance writers,
mystery writers also have their conventions. but certainly science fiction
writers can out-convention anybody by a ratio of 10 to 1. So there's a lot of
interplay
where authors are always talking to one another, meeting editors, meeting
professional writers, and there's a much tighter unity than there is in any
other genre. So I would definitely advise any aspiring science fiction writer to
start writing in the magazines. In fact, even some of my well-known clients, I
still tell them to continue writing for science fiction magazines, even though
they may get peanuts for their work compared to what they can get writing books,
because the exposure among both science fiction editors and science fiction fans
is terribly important.
Okay, I just have about one or two more on science fiction and get on to some
more general things. Would you happen to be working with any unpublished authors
at present in science fiction that we might look for? That question kind of
catches me unaware. We have a number of people that we are establishing. It's
very hard to say because in spite of what I said a few moments ago about getting
published in magazines, like most other agents, we handle very little by way of
short fiction. It's not profitable for an agent to handle science fiction
stories. There's very little that we can do for a short story writer that he or
she can't do for him or herself. By the time an author comes to us asking for
representation, and we think that person might be interesting. He's probably had
quite a number of stories published in the science fiction magazines. I will
mention one, one author that I think is enormously talented and will probably
burst on the scenes within the next couple of years, and that's a writer named
Dan Simmons, who's beginning to make some appearances in Omni and some of the
other magazines. He's a very, very talented writer, and we are about to take on
some of his longer work. Okay, one more on science fiction. I should accord my
thanks to Harlan Ellison, who was the first person to spot him, and refer him to
me. Okay, good. One more on science fiction. Are you working on selling, or do
you have in your hands any big manuscripts from some of your name authors that
might be published in the near future? Well, Gregory Benford has the author of
Timescape, which was the Nebula Award winner in the novel category for 1981, has
two novels coming out in the next year. One is Against Infinity, which is coming
out in April. Will be published by Timescape Books in hardcover, a wonderful
novel. And I believe next February, we will see Across
the Sea of Suns, which is the sequel to In the Ocean of Night, and is the second
novel in a trilogy. We also have what I consider a great novel in the making by
Richard Grant, who's made some appearances in magazines, but turned in a
spectacular novel, which is now being shaped somewhat and redone, but it's some
of the most brilliant writing I've ever read. Those who have had an early look
at it agree with me that it's a very impressive job. And I know that when that
book is finished, I believe it's got bestseller written all over it. Okay, do
you like trilogies? Yes, I like them and I encourage them. I feel they're a very
comfortable form for science fiction writers. In fact, for non-science fiction
writers as well.
The beauty of a trilogy, of course, from an agent's viewpoint, is in the kind of
package deal that one can make where you not only sign an author up for a book,
but you can sign him up for a sequel and a sequel after that. And the author
knows where he's going to be two years from now. The publisher knows what he can
expect over a couple of years. And unless the author one day runs out of steam
or gets bored with the characters that he developed in book one or two, you can
see a cumulative effect in the sales of a trilogy where publication of Book 2
makes people scurry for Book 1, and publication of Book 3 causes the publisher
to reissue Books 1 and 2, and then they put them in a box set, and they're
reviewed as a whole. It's a very nice way of publishing books, but not everybody
has a sequel in them. Right. Why does an author with reasonable talent need an
agent? But there are very few authors who, once they achieve publication, are
really able or even want to handle their own business until you become a full
-blooded professional writer with a track record. As I said before, most of your
job is writing your magazine stuff, sending it out, and developing a magazine
market. But once you begin selling, unless you really understand contractual
language,
then you're going to need an agent to interpret it for you. Also, most authors
are not as objective about their work as an agent can be, and therefore they
either demand too much or too riddle when they negotiate a contract. So an agent
can help put things in perspective and can talk both publishers and authors into
being reasonable. Agents can also exploit subsidiary rights that authors are
only dimly aware of. And agents, finally, are able to help build an author's
career by spotting that author's strengths and weaknesses and building, of
course, on the strengths and developing their talents to the utmost. There are a
few authors I know, most notably Isaac Asimov, who I don't believe have agents
or at least not regular agents. And Isaac certainly has done okay for himself,
although I think there are probably five dozen agents who have said to him,
think how well you would have done if you'd had an agent. But most authors
sooner or later feel that it is well worth the commission and other things to
have somebody, particularly when you don't live in the New York area, which is
the heart of the publishing world. If you live in California or Nebraska or
something like that, there's nothing so frightening as to be out of touch with a
publisher and not having anybody that you can call to act on your behalf. Okay,
a more personal question. Your book, How to Be Your Own Literary Agent, of
course I haven't seen that yet, But are you trying to put yourself out of
business with that? I don't think I will, for the reasons that I just told you.
The title may not be exactly accurate because, although it is designed to help
new authors get a foot in the door that they might not otherwise have, It's also
aimed at the professional author who may have an agent who may be of the kind
who simply signs on the dotted line when his agent sticks a contract under his
nose. And those authors, I think, are usually the ones who end up discovering a
couple of years down the road that they made a horrible mistake when they signed
that contract. and why didn't their agent tell them about certain things. And so
my feeling is that an enlightened author is probably an agent's best friend,
whether he's represented by an agent or not. The more that an author knows about
contracts and related subjects, the tougher he's going to be in dealing with
publishers and the more he's going to benefit the entire fraternity and sorority
of authors in this country and make an agent's job easier. So I don't feel that
I've contradicted myself by publishing a book called How to Be Your Own Literary
Agent. Okay, as the title indicates then, that really is a how-to book. Well, it
does tell you, for instance, if you're a new author, It tells you what genres
are the likeliest ones to buy your work, how to write for them, how to package
your work for them, how to get your work on the desk of an editor and avoid the
so-called flush pile. It tells you what to do if you should get an offer. It
tells you how to negotiate on your own. it tells you how to oversee what your
agent is doing if you should decide to, uh, turn your work over to an agent. It
tells you how to hire and fire an agent. And, uh, it is, it completely analyzes
publishing contracts from start to finish, um, and interprets each clause in a
way that any author can certainly get an advantage by, uh, studying, uh, my
suggestions.
So really, I guess even a beginner would get some good out of the book.
Absolutely. Okay, good. And when will that be out again? Let's see. Today is the
15th. Three days is the official publication date. February 18th. Okay, very
good. It's already created something of a controversy in New York, because one
of the chapters in the book is a somewhat outspoken attack on publishing
accounting systems. Publishers have a tendency to do what I call creative
accounting, which the bottom line is that they hold, hide, or misguide authors
as to how much in royalties they're entitled to. A couple of days ago, the New
York Times picked up on that chapter and published an article under the
headline, Agent Says Publishers Are Cheating Authors. So we've got what I
consider a very healthy controversy going, and certainly one that every author
ought to be interested in, because it really is the gut issue. I know many new
authors and aspiring authors, all they want to know is who's going to publish my
book, and whatever they pay me, whatever advance I get, is fine with me. But as
they become more and more professional and experienced, They may wake up one day
and realize that they're not getting everything that's owing to them because the
publishers have obscured some of the royalty reporting systems that would enable
an author to get his full due. And so I've tried to dispel some of the mystery
around the reading of royalty statements and so authors can get a better idea of
what is being told to them and whether any money is being hidden.
Okay, in reading your columns over a period of time, I think I've caught you
saying a couple times that even with a lot of talent and even with a great
manuscript, writers still may not make it because of the way the publishing
industry is set up. Is that sort of a cynical attitude on your part? Well, I
don't say it with any pride. I say it with a great deal of sadness.
Many, in the last couple of years, the prices of books have gone prohibitively
high. A hardcover novel these days sells for anywhere from $15 to $20, and a
paperback novel sells anywhere from $3 to $5 or even a little more. and the
consumer the book buyer is shying away from the marketplace now because he seems
to feel there are better ways to spend $20 or $5 even as a result the book sales
have been dropping and the publishers have become more and more selective as to
what they buy unfortunately that all gets passed down to the author and more and
more frequently in the last couple of years I have had to turn away as all my
colleagues in the agency business have had to do I've had to turn away a number
of very good books that were well written but didn't really fit into certain
categories that I know are actively buying, and so what you end up with is a
well-written book that really isn't saleable, and it can often break your heart
to send a book like that back. It doesn't hurt you as much to send back a bad
book as it does to send back a good one, but there's nothing guaranteeing that a
good book is going to sell, and that I would say is possibly the major
difference between publishing today and publishing 10 years ago. Okay, one more
follow-up on that. Does the system, as you described it, lead to sort of hack
writing, or writing that's not very good? No, quite the contrary. I think the
level of writing is getting better because publishers don't need to publish hack
writing anymore when they can get so many good writers. The market has shrunk.
For instance, the paperback field, whereas about two or three years ago, there
were, I would say, 13 active viable paperbacks ranging from the modest size ones
to the giant. Several have gone out of business, and three or four more have
been absorbed into other companies, and now one can count six or seven paperback
publishers left. and so the clamor to be published by those houses is increasing
and so the publishers can afford to be more selective than ever before. So my
feeling is that, although I don't like to use the word hack, that certainly the
inferior writer is either going to have to try harder or he's going to drop out
because there are just too many good writers waiting to take his place. Okay,
Mr. Curtis I have about I want to move I have about 10 minutes left if you can
spare that I wanted to talk about some personal things about your background and
your own work if you have the time for that Absolutely
Okay, I was going to say how does one become an agent, but I guess I better ask
how you became one Well when I think for a long time I always wanted to be a
writer and when I got out of college, I discovered that there were no real jobs
for writers, so I decided to get into a related field, publishing. I could not
find a job at a publishing company, so I finally ended up working for a leading
literary agency, Scott Merida, and there I stayed for some seven or eight years,
and that was my apprenticeship. and after some seven years I really did have an
itch to write and so I had been writing even while I worked for Scott Merida so
I left that firm and became a freelance writer and of course having been an
agent I was much better connected than most freelance writers could ever hope to
be so the transition was not as hard for me as it would be if somebody left some
other job. I did a lot of magazine work, but eventually realized that the
magazine market was in its twilight, and began focusing on books. I wrote a lot
of paperback novels, and then eventually got into such areas as collaboration,
books on conservation. I found that I had a forte in the area of humor so I did
a number of satirical books I wrote just about anything that people would pay
money for and it was a very very good grounding and after about five years of
that a number of my old clients looked me up and asked me if I would represent
them and since I was not making a fortune as a writer in spite of the fact that
to date I've had about 45 books published, I decided that perhaps I would go
back into agenting, and I started my own firm, and for two or three years, I was
both a writer and a literary agent. Literally, I had two desks back to back with
a swivel chair between them, and in the morning I would do one thing and in the
afternoon I would do another and I would try not to let one contaminate the
other. And eventually, when I discovered that I could make more money on a few
phone calls as an agent than I could for four or five months writing books, it
was pretty clear to me where my career was heading. But I have not given up my
writing. The column, of course, is very satisfying. And from time to time, I
might take a crack at a commercial novel or a nonfiction book. I get up at five
or six in the morning, I'll write for an hour or so, then I'll go to work, and
although an hour a day may not seem like a lot, as most professional writers
will tell you, over a period of a couple of months, one can write a book at an
hour a day as long as you stay with it and turn out something every day. So I do
consider myself a literary agent with a side order of writing.
In looking over the books that I know you've written in the past few years, it
seems to me that a lot of your nonfiction books have been dealing with issues of
social concern, like the nuclear lessons, the inequality in American
communities, and so forth. Is that because of personal taste or because of your
collaborator? Well, I take some pride in some of the work that I've done in the
area of conservation.
In around 1970 or so, I was approached by a woman who had accumulated a great
deal of quite terrifying information about the nuclear power industry. And she
asked me to collaborate with her. I knew very little about it, but I did work
with her. And out of that collaboration came a book that was published by
Doubleday called Perils of the Peaceful Atom. It was the first popular book on
the dangers of nuclear power plants. And although it was supplanted later on by
books published by people, authorities, scientists, and PhDs, whereas we were
only laymen and women, I like to think that that book did open the door to
discussion of the nuclear power issues, which finally culminated in the Three
Mile Island accident years later. And I was able to say that I had told you so.
Many of the things that happened were predicted in that book years earlier, and
of course nobody really wanted to listen. I have written some other books of
social value I'm very proud of them I'm also, if I may add very proud of an
agent to have brought into the world many books on social issues and things like
that we recently handled a magnificent first novel about the Vietnam War called
The Thirteenth Valley, which went on the bestseller list, and opened the door to
what I know will now be a state of Vietnam fiction. Up until that time, people
had said that nobody really wanted to read about Vietnam, and so we've now
enabled some fresh air to blow into the marketplace with that novel. and again,
this is an accomplishment that I'm very proud of.
What about your fiction, your novels? Could you give me an idea of what kind of
things you write about, and if they sell well? Well, a couple of years ago,
while I was still full, well, more than that, about a decade ago, So I conceived
a paperback series featuring a hero that I always thought was rather unusual. He
was a detective in the area of sports. And a series of books featuring this hero
was, the series was called The Pro, and the books were published by Warner. We
did four of those, and at the moment I'm trying to revive that series or
something along those lines because right now, although there's a great deal of
male action-adventure fiction being published, everybody's getting bored with
the same old heroes, the mercenaries, the dirty dozens, and a series like that.
And so I'm trying to get revived, this hero that I think is a rather refreshing
one. But I'm not able to do too much in the fiction area simply because of time.
Okay, I just have a couple more here. I remember reading one of your columns
where you mentioned, I guess it was an innovation on your part as an agent where
you contracted with a publicity firm for your clients and so forth. I wondered
if things like that that you've done for your clients might be a little
different or innovative or whatever. Well, every agent, of course, is trying to
seek a better way to handle his clients and more advantages for his clients. and
one of the things that upsets me deeply is the fact that publishers are very
reluctant to spend promotional money on any authors except the big-name
celebrity authors. and so I attempted a couple of years ago to rectify that by
asking my clients in effect to chip in each one of them would be in effect taxed
a couple of extra percentage points of commission and that tax would go towards
a fund which we used to hire a publicity agent who would publicize The Little
Guy. And some of the campaigns were quite successful. Some aspects of the
campaign were not so successful. And it was because of the inconsistency of the
results that we finally dropped the program. But some of it has had lasting
results and it certainly created a lot of talk in the industry and among
authors. And it was, I thought, a noble experiment in the area of getting the
lesser-known authors publicized. But it's still difficult. The market inclines
towards the big name, and the struggle to become a big name is extremely
intense, and very, very few people emerge.
Okay, what about movie deals for books that are worthy of it? Do you actively
seek them out, or do movie houses come to you? Well, it's a combination.
Most books that are published that are of any value at all are covered by the
movie studios, producers, and the people in New York whose job it is to scout on
behalf of various Hollywood interests. So the chances are that if an agent is
handling a good book at all, it will have been seen in one way or another by
producers, directors, studio people and so forth. but they have amazing ways of
getting hold of manuscripts, no matter how secretive you try to be. And so long
before you're ready to show them, they've already been exposed. Nevertheless, if
we get a hot manuscript and we really think it's going to make a terrific book,
we actively try to find a movie producer for it. And so sometimes the deals come
to us and sometimes we generate them.
Okay, that's about I mean, there's lots of questions I could keep on talking for
a long time but I think we have enough and we've taken enough of your time But
listen, is there anything anything I haven't asked that you think listeners
should know or anything at all that you'd like to talk about while we still have
some tape left?
No, I'd be happy to answer any other questions you may have Um, I will say that,
uh, uh, we were talking about innovations before. Um, I may be springing a very
radical, uh, proposition on the publishing industry that I believe will create a
lot of talk and controversy, and I'm not doing it just to publicize myself, but
I've begun to, uh, because of my deep concern about royalty accounting, uh, and
and how publishers have managed to manipulate and hide authors' royalties, I'm
going to be making a proposal to the publishing industry about a radically
different way of accounting royalties based not on sales, but on copies printed.
And I would say that within the next few months, you might begin looking for
some stirring in that area and I believe it could have some rather radical
effects on the way people think about the traditional way of accounting
royalties. Yeah, I remember some of your columns, I think you sort of hinted at
certain things about the way the publishers did that. Right. Well, I actually do
suggest something like it in my book, but I will now be amplifying on it And if
I can get some of the publishing media to pick up on these suggestions, it
should make for very, very lively dialogue, and certainly one that's well
overdue in this 18th century business we call publishing. Well, I'd take it,
then, in the, let's say, the three-part relationship here, a writer, an agent,
and a publisher, that you would say probably the publisher has much the best of
it? No, I don't think so at all. So I've heard everybody accuse everybody else
of having the best of it. There are rich agents, there are agents who are
struggling, there are rich authors and authors who are struggling, and there are
rich publishers and there are publishers who are struggling. I, in spite of some
of the belligerent things I may have said, I have a great, great many friends
among the publishers and I want to see them do well. And so I've come to think
of it as a symbiotic environment in which everybody really does depend on
everybody else. And an agent's job is not just to negotiate contracts, but to
negotiate interests so that nobody gets so badly hurt that he can't carry on. I
mean, publishers are always complaining about their overhead, and it's
well to remind them that agents have to pay their rent also. But some agents get
very greedy, and they feel that the only way for an author to become famous is
to pin the publisher to the wall with a cruel deal. and sometimes that can
backfire in terms of how much money is left after you've hit a publisher that
hard, how much money is left for the struggling author. The paperback publisher
that consistently pays $2 or $3 million for one or two authors is going to find
himself neglecting the new author because he can't afford to pay him, or if he
should buy a new author's work, he won't have any money left to publicize or
promote that author's book. So there's something even to be said for not being
greedy on behalf of your authors and giving the publisher an even break. Okay,
very good. Okay, listen, we're going to turn off the recorder.